# ctrl-flow Specification - Modelica Export

## Purpose

This document provides the requirements for the Modelica Export functionality in ctrl-flow.
An example implementation of the exported Modelica package structure is provided in the repository under `UserProject`.

[Non prescriptive text is enclosed in brackets.]

## Requirements

### Package Structure And Content

One package shall be created for _each_ user project.
The top-level package name shall match the user-assigned project name, subject to Modelica class name constraints as defined in the Modelica Specification.
The exported package shall have the following structure:

- **`<SystemType>`**: One package shall be created for each `<SystemType>` configured by the user in the project.
  - Each `<SystemType>` package corresponds to a package within `Buildings.Templates` or other loaded library of templates.
  - The application shall support nested subpackages and adopt the same structure as the original Templates package.
  - Inside each package, one class shall be created for each system configured by the user in this project:
    - Each class shall extend the template class for the corresponding system type, and includes the class modifications corresponding to the configuration settings specified by the user through the configuration page in ctrl-flow.
  - [In this example, `AirHandlersFans` contains two specified configurations and `ZoneEquipment` contains a single specified configuration.]
- **`<SystemType>/Configuration`**: Data records with configuration parameters, one for each configuration
  - All parameter bindings are ***literal assignments***: expressions shall be evaluated to their numeric/string values before export.
  - These records only contain a subset of all the parameters that define a system configuration and which are exposed in ctrl-flow.
  - This subset is the one needed to enable/disable the control parameters and equipment characteristics in **`Data`**.
- **`Data`**: Data records with control parameters and equipment characteristics
  - These shall be mapped to the schedules in ctrl-flow.
  - One class shall be created for each `<SystemType>` and include the parameters for all the systems of that type.
  - One class `AllSystems` shall also be created that extends each `<SystemType>` record and contains the declarations of all project-level parameters such as energy and ventilation standards, climate zone, project name, address, type of building, floor area, unit system, and miscellaneous notes.
  - [In this example, parameters are provided for two VAV AHUs (one with each configuration) and 10 VAV boxes (all with the same configuration).]
- [**`Examples`** (not required): These are example models demonstrating how the configured classes can be instantiated to build a simulation model.]

### Dependency Management

A class annotation `uses` shall be added to the exported package to specify the dependency libraries.
[In this example, `./package.mo` contains the annotation `Buildings(version="13.0.0")`.]

## [FAQ]

> Where in the software pipeline this is generated? From ctrl-flow, or from ctrl-flow output file(s)?

In the flow diagram at https://github.com/lbl-srg/ctrl-flow-dev/blob/main/docs/linkage-schema.md#overview-of-data-flow, this package represents the output from the "Write Selections to Modelica" routine. It is directly created from "Linkage Schema (Selections)".

> Does back translation work?

Back translation (importing Modelica code back into ctrl-flow) is not currently specified.
Instead, ctrl-flow relies on user storage (cloud-based or local) ***in its own proprietary format*** for continued editing.
Once you export to a Modelica package and make changes to that exported code, you cannot import those changes back into ctrl-flow for further editing.

This limitation is due to a significant deviation of the development from the original specification at https://github.com/lbl-srg/ctrl-flow-dev/blob/main/specification/requirements.html.
That specification has been updated in [requirements.md](requirements.md) to reflect the current state of development of MBL templates and of ctrl-flow.

*Edit on 10/9/25*. Work is underway to scope the effort required to:
- Ensure compatibility with Modelica import functionality
- Implement Modelica import using the JSON output generated by modelica-json

> Where is project meta data, such as name and address of building, stored?

This data is stored in `UserProject.Data.AllSystems`.
The current definition of the parent class `Buildings.Templates.Data.AllSystems` only includes parameters for the unit system, ventilation standard and climate zone.
We should add there the additional parameters needed to fully specify a design project.

> Where does weather data come from as nearest location may need to be pulled from server.

Nice to have, if budget permits.

> Should entries such as `damOut(dp_nominal={15, 15})` rather use `each dp_nominal=15`? In particular if there are 50+ VAV boxes.

Nice to have, if budget permits.
